Credit where credit's due. President
Trump made a big bet that the US had a
magnetic appeal and that would enable
him to get a better deal from US [music]
trade partners and companies that want
to do business in the United States. On
the evidence of the last few months,
that bet is playing out pretty nicely.
Did the economics profession get it
wrong on tariffs
or is the impact just delayed?
Economists don't agree on much. One
thing they do agree on is that free
trade is good and that tariffs are bad.
If we were to trace [music] US tariffs
over the last, let's say, 100 years or
so,
there's our axes. From the end of the
19th century into the start of the 20th,
tariffs were on a declining trend. Get
to 1930 and we get the infamous Smoot
Holy Act and most economists believe
[music] contributed to and deepened the
Great Depression. From that point on, we
have a continuous decline in the average
US tariff rate. [music] Till Trump
started his second term, he's jacked it
all the way up to around 15%. [music]
For a moment, Trump escalated US tariffs
on China all the way to 125%.
>> [music]
>> If you plugged the US tariffs into a
model of the global economy, what it
said was that there was going to be a
really significant drag on growth and
there was also going to be a significant
upward impulse to prices [music]
and low growth and high prices is a
challenging state of the world which
economists call stagflation. [music]
Markets panicked.
Let's look at the S&P 500. It looked
[music] like this. If we looked at a
chart for economists forecasts for
inflation, we've got the COVID bump in
inflation. We've got prices coming
almost back down to target. But then, oh
dear, President Trump's introduced his
tariffs and we get another inflationary
bump. But when we look at what's
happened to inflation over the summer,
it's not come down, but it's not come up
either. that inflationary bump from
tariffs [music] that the Fed was focused
on as a risk before they cut interest
rates, it hasn't materialized, at least
not yet.
We looked at lots of the different
things which people in the United States
buy every day. If tariffs were being
passed on to consumers, we'd see a
pretty tight relationship. In fact,
what's happening is there doesn't seem
to be a very strong relationship at all.
US firms are facing higher costs for
their imports. So far though, they're
not passing those higher costs onto
consumers.
Why is that? Well, it's because US
importers and foreign exporters saw the
Trump tariffs coming and they rushed to
frontload shipping to the United [music]
States before the tariffs could come
into force to build up cheap inventories
that they could then sell down after the
tariffs came into place. If we look at a
chart of US imports, what we see is that
in the first month of 2025,
imports weren't exactly off the scale,
but they were significantly higher than
they had been in the same months in 2024
and the average of past years.
One thing that's happened is that we've
gone from a lot of [music] unexpected
bad news concentrated on a single day to
a series of country bycountry deals.
[music]
Some of which brought good news relative
to the previous status quo. We have US
allies like Japan and Korea which are
scrambling to make offers to the United
States promising hundreds of billions of
dollars to help rebuild US manufacturing
as a price to retain access to the US
[music] market. They're something of a
Swiss cheese of exemptions [music] and
carveouts and smaller tariffs obviously
have a smaller impact.
The trade war is a drag, but it's not
the only thing which is happening. We've
got tax cuts with Trump's one big
beautiful bill, and we've got a bonfire
of regulations which is stoking the
animal spirits of US businesses. [music]
We've also got the artificial
intelligence boom and a huge amount of
investment [music] going into data
centers.
AI and the trade war kind of point in
opposite directions and investors are
paying much more attention to the
potential for AI to be a significant
profit driver. Certainly, it seems like
there's enormous potential with
artificial intelligence. At the same
time, the International Monetary Fund
and other economists are warning that
the markets have got a bit over ahead of
themselves. There's irrational
exuberance. [music] If markets have a
moment where they lose their confidence,
that can only mean one trajectory for
stocks downward.
There are signs of weakness showing up
in the US economy. We've gone from a
labor market comfortably creating a
100,000 or more jobs every month to
barely expanding. And in some months,
the number of jobs shrank. So, a concern
here is that well, when the tariffs do
start to hit, they're going to be
hitting an economy where the labor
market's already weak and potentially
amplifying that downward trend. China,
which views itself more as a peer
competitor to the United States, they've
turned up with their own leverage. You
impose tariffs on us, we're going to
impose tariffs on you. You block our
access to semiconductors, we'll block
your access to rare earths. And we're
seeing the impact of that really clearly
[music] in the trade data. China's
exports to the United States are way
down relative [music] to where they were
last year. way down relative to the
historical trend.
So, who pays for the cost of tariffs?
We're seeing US firms absorbing tariffs
[music] in lower profit margins. Why
might that be? I can think of two
reasons. The first is no one wants to be
the first [music] to raise their prices
and lose market share. The second, and
this is more speculative, is no one
wants a vengeful US [music] president.
But despite his well-known love of gold,
the president is not an alchemist. He
can't make something from nothing. That
money has to come from somewhere.
And if the US Treasury is looking
forward to $3 trillion in tariff revenue
over the next decade, all of the
evidence so far suggests that in the
end, the bulk of it is going to come
from US businesses and US households.
One way of thinking about this second
Trump presidency is that it's an
innovative approach to managing the
fading of America's imperial movement.
America was [music] the world's single
superpower. In 2025, that's clearly not
the case. Trump is attempting to use
that last moment [music] of strength to
get a better deal. Will President Trump
succeed in reigniting the flame of
American preeeminence or will he just
hasten the end? I think on that question
the jury [music] is still out.